-01 version initial update (#2)
ietf-rats/draft-xia-rats-key-negotiation-integration: draft-xia-rats-key-negotiation-integration.md

At this point, there are multiple options for the secure channel protocol that can be established, such as TLS, IPSec, QUIC, OHTTP, etc.
The user may only need to complete E2E key negotiation based on remote attestation.
As for which secure protocol or application layer encryption the negotiated key is used for, and how it is used, there can be various implementation methods.

> * Scenario 3: A company intends to deploy its private large model or file system to a public cloud platform. However, for security reasons, it first uploads the encrypted objects to the cloud platform. Subsequently, it needs to conduct a security check on the TEE (Trusted Execution Environment) within the cloud platform's computing environment using remote attestation. Once the security check is passed, the decryption key is sent to decrypt the uploaded objects. It is important to note that between the remote attestation and the sending of the decryption key, a key binding must be established to prevent diversion attack. 

Reviewer: need a reference to diversion attack, such as
https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2025-rats-01/materials/slides-interim-2025-rats-01-sessa-identity-crisis-in-attested-tls-for-confidential-computing-00.pdf

and the corresponding defintion.

Reviewer 2: I can add some text here. Early next week I hope to release a preprint. We can directly reference that then, rather than referencing a presentation.

At this point, there are multiple options for the secure channel protocol that can be established, such as TLS, IPSec, QUIC, OHTTP, etc.
The user may only need to complete E2E key negotiation based on remote attestation.
As for which secure protocol or application layer encryption the negotiated key is used for, and how it is used, there can be various implementation methods.

> * Scenario 3: A company intends to deploy its private large model or file system to a public cloud platform. However, for security reasons, it first uploads the encrypted objects to the cloud platform. Subsequently, it needs to conduct a security check on the TEE (Trusted Execution Environment) within the cloud platform's computing environment using remote attestation. Once the security check is passed, the decryption key is sent to decrypt the uploaded objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Scenario 3: A company intends to deploy its private large model or file system in a public cloud platform's trusted execution environment (TEE). To keep it deployed content confidential, the company first uploads the encrypted objects to the cloud platform. Subsequently, it conducts a security check on the cloud platform's TEE using remote attestation. Once the security check has passed, the decryption key is sent to decrypt the uploaded objects inside the TEE.
```

Reviewer 3: These changes are just reshuffling a bit of the content. But! The text "within the cloud platform's computing environment" is now gone. Was that meant to be different from the TEE? For example, this could also have been the hosting environment in a CSP node, but I could not tell.

Author: Yes, TEE is sufficient and abstract enough, as this scenario is indeed not limited to public clouds.

> It is important to note that between the remote attestation and the key negotiation, a key binding mechanism between the  attestation result and the attester's identity must be established to prevent diversion attack.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important to note that between the remote attestation and the key negotiation, a key binding mechanism between the Attestation Result and the Attester's identity (e.g., an Attestation Key Certificate) has to be established to prevent diversion attack.
```

Reviewer 3: Does this suggested change retain the intended meaning?

Reviewer: For me, it is not clear that, whether putting the attester id into the evidence (or put it into the meta data of evidence), and that of attestation result is already counted as key binding, or another key binding mechanism should be applied.

Author: > For me, it is not clear that, whether putting the attester id into the evidence (or put it into the meta data of evidence), and that of attestation result is already counted as key binding, or another key binding mechanism should be applied.

My understanding is that it would be more appropriate to place it in the metadata. The previous RATS AR probably did not specifically consider the issue of key binding.

At this point, there are multiple options for the secure channel protocol that can be established, such as TLS, IPSec, QUIC, OHTTP, etc.
The user may only need to complete E2E key negotiation based on remote attestation.
As for which secure protocol or application layer encryption the negotiated key is used for, and how it is used, there can be various implementation methods.
* Scenario 3: A company intends to deploy its private large model or file system to a public cloud platform. However, for security reasons, it first uploads the encrypted objects to the cloud platform. Subsequently, it needs to conduct a security check on the TEE (Trusted Execution Environment) within the cloud platform's computing environment using remote attestation. Once the security check is passed, the decryption key is sent to decrypt the uploaded objects. 

> It is important to note that between the remote attestation and the key negotiation, a key binding mechanism between the  attestation result and the attester's identity must be established to prevent diversion attack. 

Reviewer: Suggested to add the definition of terms in the section notations as follows

    Key Binding:  A security protocol mechanism that cryptographically ties the results of a remote attestation to a specific communication session or entity identity. This ensures that the attestation evidence cannot be diverted and used by an attacker to impersonate the prover in a different context. 
    Diversion Attack:  A man-in-the-middle attack where an adversary intercepts and forwards attestation messages to trick a verifier into believing that the adversary's session is authenticated. The attacker's goal is to divert the authentication result and the subsequent privileged information (e.g., keys) to itself. Key Binding is the primary defense against this attack.

Reviewer 2: @junzhanghw Could you share the source of these definitions?

Reviewer: @muhammad-usama-sardar , i summarize them by my own words as i do not find them in the attested-tls slides, if you can find the official definition and cite the source it will be better.

So KMS enables applications to retrieve their own application-layer encryption/authentication symmetric/asymmetric keys and facilitate the distribution of these keys between the required applications.
Furthermore, the method of integrating key distribution into the remote attestation interaction Passport Model process is shown in the following diagram:

~~~
            .------------.
            |            | 2. Compare Evidence
            |  Verifier  | against appraisal policy
            |            |
            '--------+---'
                ^    |
  1. Evidence + |    | 3. Attestation
  Raw public key|    | Result + Raw public key or Certificate
  or Certificate|    v
            .---+--------.                .-------------.
            |            +--------------->|   Relying   | 5. Compare Attestation
            |  Attester  |4. Attestation  |    Party    | Result against
            |            |   Result +     |    & KMS    | appraisal policy
            '------------' Raw public key '-------------' + Distribute Keys

>                            or Certificate

Reviewer: in step 3,5 raw public key or certificate needed to be signed

Author: In fact, in steps 1 and 3, the Attester's identity (raw public key or certificate) each requires signing by the Attester and Verifier's RATS signing keys. I will revise the latest diagram and add textual explanations.

>                            or Certificate

Reviewer: in step 1,3, to use hash of raw public key or certificate, then in step 4, the information because AR+signed hash+raw pub key/certificate

Author: What do you mean by signed hash here? What is its purpose?

## Integrating E2E Key Negotiation Into Remote Attestation

The current main implementation mechanism for E2E key negotiation is DHE and ECDHE. Taking ECDHE as an example, the method of integrating it into remote attestation passport Model process is shown in the following figure:

~~~
           .------------.
           |            | 4. Compare Evidence
           |  Verifier  | against appraisal policy
           |            |
           '--------+---'
 3. Evidence + ^    |
    pubS +     |    |5. Attestation
    Attester's |    | Result + pubS + Attester's identity

>     identity   |    v     1. Attestation

Reviewer: Is here pubS not equal to Attester's id?

Reviewer 2: No, `identity` is different from `pubS` (= public key)

Author: The two are distinct: pubS serves as the material for key negotiation, which is a requirement of the business. The attester's ID plays a role in binding the evidence to the attester's entity identity during the remote attestation process, acting as a security mechanism to prevent diversion attacks.

Reviewer: So it seems that including attester id is a general approach to prevent diversion attack (even in the case that key negotiation is not needed).  Do we need to include it explicitly in the information flow, or we can simply mention it in the security consideration section? I prefer to decouple the part to handle diversion attack with the key negotiation inside attestation (which is the main focus of this draft).

Author: > So it seems that including attester id is a general approach to prevent diversion attack (even in the case that key negotiation is not needed). Do we need to include it explicitly in the information flow, or we can simply mention it in the security consideration section? I prefer to decouple the part to handle diversion attack with the key negotiation inside attestation (which is the main focus of this draft).

No, the binding of the attester ID is not only for preventing diversion attacks; the public key in the ID is also used for key distribution in use cases 1 and 3. Therefore, it needs to be explicitly included in the information flow. As for use case 2, the attester ID is indeed only used to prove the binding relationship with the attester result.

The current main implementation mechanism for E2E key negotiation is DHE and ECDHE. Taking ECDHE as an example, the method of integrating it into remote attestation is shown in the following figure:

~~~
           .------------.
           |            | 4. Compare Evidence
           |  Verifier  | against appraisal policy
           |            |
           '--------+---'
               ^    |
 3. Evidence + |    | 5. Attestation
    pubS       |    | Result + pubS
               |    v     1. Attestation
          .---+--------. Request + pubC.-------------.
          |  Attester  <-------------->|   Relying   | 7. Compare Attestation
          |  & Server  | 6.Attestation |    Party    | Result against
          |            | Result        |    & Client | appraisal policy
          '------------' + pubS        '-------------' + SK = privC * pubS

>         2. SK = privS * pubC

Reviewer: in step 5,6 raw public key or certificate needed to be signed

Author: In fact, in steps 3 and 5, the Attester's identity (raw public key or certificate) each requires signing by the Attester and Verifier's RATS signing keys. I will revise the latest diagram and add textual explanations.

>         2. SK = privS * pubC

Reviewer: in step 3,5, to use hash of raw public key or certificate, then in step 6, the information because AR+signed hash+raw pubS

Author: What do you mean by signed hash here? What is its purpose?

Reviewer: I mean that using the hash(raw public key) reduces the payload to be delivered from Attester to Verifier, and Verifier to the Attester, as actually the Verifier does not appraise it and just sign it. So finally the Attester can send the raw public key, and the Attestation Result to the Relying Party, while the hash of raw public key is inside the signed Attestation Result.

So there are two possible options

1. Raw Public key/Cerificate
2. hash(raw public key/certificate)

also, in the option two, when the raw pub key/certificate remains unchanged for the reconnection with the relying party, there is even no need to send the raw public/key from attester to the relying party, as long as the relying party has a cache of the raw public key as it can compare the hash inside the attestation result with the hash of raw public key in its local data set.

Author: Understood, using the hash of the raw public key/certificate can be an optimized option, but I'm not sure if this optimization is necessary. What do others think?
In any case, we can add a description of this option in the text section. Could you update it directly?

Reviewer: I have changed my mind a little bit. So for the first time connection between the Attester and Relying Party, it is better to use the raw public key / certificate directly as you can embed them into the Attestation Result. For the second time/third time while the raw public key/certificate remains unchanged, then you can use the hash of them, as the Relying Party has already the cache of the raw public key/certificate, and it can compare the received hash, with the hash of pub key/certificate in its cache.

Author: > I have changed my mind a little bit. So for the first time connection between the Attester and Relying Party, it is better to use the raw public key / certificate directly as you can embed them into the Attestation Result. For the second time/third time while the raw public key/certificate remains unchanged, then you can use the hash of them, as the Relying Party has already the cache of the raw public key/certificate, and it can compare the received hash, with the hash of pub key/certificate in its cache.

yes, this is the right way. Could you add some text about it?

Reviewer: I have created one new section “Optimization Considerations” and add some text into it. I have launched the Pull Request for this change.

~~~
            .------------.
            |            | 2. Compare Evidence
            |  Verifier  | against appraisal policy
            |            |
            '--------+---'
                ^    |
  1. Evidence + |    | 3. Attestation
  Raw public key|    | Result + Raw public key or Certificate
  or Certificate|    v
            .---+--------.                .-------------.
            |            +--------------->|Relying Party| 5. Compare Attestation
            |  Attester  |4. Attestation  |& Enterprise | Result against
            |            |   Result +     |      KMS    | appraisal policy
            '------------' Raw public key '-------------' + Distribute Keys
                           or Certificate

> 

Reviewer: in step 3,4 raw public key or certificate needed to be signed

Author: In fact, in steps 1 and 3, the Attester's identity (raw public key or certificate) each requires signing by the Attester and Verifier's RATS signing keys. I will revise the latest diagram and add textual explanations.

> 

Reviewer: in step 1,3, to use hash of raw public key or certificate, then in step 4, the information because AR+signed hash+raw pub  key/certificate

Author: What do you mean by signed hash here? What is its purpose?

# Security Considerations

Risk of relay attacks needs to be evaluated in the design.

> 

Reviewer 2: Since it is removed, what prevents a relay attack in this design?

Author: Usama, could you first write a section on the threat analysis of relay attacks?

Reviewer 2: Sure, but I need some time until the end of next week. I think cutoff is 21st, so we can make it.

> 

Reviewer: The underlying conveyance protocol should provide the protections (like data signature, secure channel, etc) between Attester, Verifier and Relying Party to prevent relay attack.

Reviewer 2: Conveyance protocol alone cannot prevent relay attack. There has to be binding too.

Reviewer: In addition, certain channel binding protocols should be used to establish the connection between the Attester, Verifier, and Relying Party.
